# The No (Human) Code Future

AI coding assistance started as simple code completion. It then moved to synchronous agents based in IDEs. It is now evolving into fleets of autonomous agents housed in control planes like CLIs. At each stage, human developers write less code. The expectation is that this trend will continue until humans are writing no code at all. Instead they define system intent and orchestrate agents to realize that intent.

Given this, knowing the relative proportion of AI and human code in our code base provides an important insight into where we are on our march toward a no code future.

## The Measurement Dilemma

Unfortunately, measuring the relative contribution of AI and human code is surprisingly difficult, for a variety of reasons.

### No Widely Accepted Definition of "AI-generated code"
* Measured AI Code can be     'suggested' vs, 'inserted' vs. 'accepted' vs. 'delivered' vs. 'influenced'
* GitHub Copilot's definition is based on lines inserted via acceptance actions

### Measurement Gaps
* Accepted AI code can be modified after acceptance
* AI code can be copy/pasted into source files
* Central (vendor) collection tooling may not align with organization need
* Local collection tooling may not be installed or configured correctly

### The Ratio Math Isn't Clean
* The most intuitive ratio is Copilot lines added/deleted divided by total repository lines changed
     * AI/Repository LoC changes
* This ratio combines AI code sources that are not defined the same (inserted vs delivered)

## The Qualified Path Forward

* Copilot lines added/deleted divided by total repository lines changed can be a useful, if limited, measure of relative AI code contribution
* It provides a rough view, particulary over time, of 'how much code comes from AI'
* It does not provide an answer to the question: 'how good is the AI code?'
     * Quality can be viewed via matching AI code contribution with defect rates
* It is at best a floor estimate and a directional indicator, not a precise measurement
* It is best used at the repository level, not the team or individual level

Despite these known limitations and qualifications, it still makes sense to use the AI/Repository LoC changes as a directional indicator of the relative contribution of AI code to our codebase. It is a simple, easy to understand metric that can be used to track our progress toward a no (human) code future.
